　　About Marx:

　　Karl Heinrich Marx (May 5, 1818   March 14, 1883) was a Prussianphilosopher, political economist, and revolutionary. Marx addressed awide range of issues; he is most famous for his analysis of history,summed up in the opening line of the introduction to the CommunistManifesto (1848): "The history of all hitherto existing society is the his-tory of class struggles." Marx believed that capitalism would be replacedby socialism which in turn would bring upon communism. Source:Wikipedia

　　About Engels:

　　Friedrich Engels (November 28, 1820, Barmen, Prussia   August 5,1895, London, England) a 19th century German social scientist andphilosopher, developed communist theory alongside his better-knowncollaborator, Karl Marx, co-authoring The Communist Manifesto (1848).Engels also edited the second and third volumes of Das Kapital after Marx's death. Source: Wikipedia

　　Introduction

　　A spectre is haunting Europe   the spectre of communism. All thepowers of old Europe have entered into a holy alliance to exorcise thisspectre: Pope and Tsar, Metternich and Guizot, French Radicals andGerman police-spies.

　　Where is the party in opposition that has not been decried as commun-istic by its opponents in power? Where is the opposition that has nothurled back the branding reproach of communism, against the more ad-vanced opposition parties, as well as against its reactionary adversaries?

　　Two things result from this fact:

　　Communism is already acknowledged by all European powers to be it-self a power.

　　It is high time that Communists should openly, in the face of thewhole world, publish their views, their aims, their tendencies, and meetthis nursery tale of the spectre of communism with a manifesto of theparty itself.

　　To this end, Communists of various nationalities have assembled inLondon and sketched the following manifesto, to be published in theEnglish, French, German, Italian, Flemish and Danish languages.

　　Chapter 1

　　Bourgeois and Proletarians

　　The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles.

　　Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guild-masterand journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constantopposition to one another, carried on an uninterrupted, now hidden,now open fight, a fight that each time ended, either in a revolutionary re-constitution of society at large, or in the common ruin of the contendingclasses.

　　In the earlier epochs of history, we find almost everywhere a complic-ated arrangement of society into various orders, a manifold gradation ofsocial rank. In ancient Rome we have patricians, knights, plebeians,slaves; in the Middle Ages, feudal lords, vassals, guild-masters, journey-men, apprentices, serfs; in almost all of these classes, again, subordinategradations.

　　The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted from the ruins offeudal society has not done away with class antagonisms. It has but es-tablished new classes, new conditions of oppression, new forms ofstruggle in place of the old ones.

　　Our epoch, the epoch of the bourgeoisie, possesses, however, this dis-tinct feature: it has simplified class antagonisms. Society as a whole ismore and more splitting up into two great hostile camps, into two greatclasses directly facing each other   bourgeoisie and proletariat.

　　From the serfs of the Middle Ages sprang the chartered burghers ofthe earliest towns. From these burgesses the first elements of the bour-geoisie were developed.

　　The discovery of America, the rounding of the Cape, opened up freshground for the rising bourgeoisie. The East-Indian and Chinese markets,the colonization of America, trade with the colonies, the increase in themeans of exchange and in commodities generally, gave to commerce, tonavigation, to industry, an impulse never before known, and thereby, to

　　the revolutionary element in the tottering feudal society, a rapiddevelopment.

　　The feudal system of industry, in which industrial production wasmonopolized by closed guilds, now no longer suffices for the growingwants of the new markets. The manufacturing system took its place. Theguild-masters were pushed aside by the manufacturing middle class; di-vision of labor between the different corporate guilds vanished in theface of division of labor in each single workshop.

　　Meantime, the markets kept ever growing, the demand ever rising.Even manufacturers no longer sufficed. Thereupon, steam and ma-chinery revolutionized industrial production. The place of manufacturewas taken by the giant, Modern Industry; the place of the industrialmiddle class by industrial millionaires, the leaders of the whole industri-al armies, the modern bourgeois.

　　Modern industry has established the world market, for which the dis-covery of America paved the way. This market has given an immensedevelopment to commerce, to navigation, to communication by land.This development has, in turn, reacted on the extension of industry; andin proportion as industry, commerce, navigation, railways extended, inthe same proportion the bourgeoisie developed, increased its capital, andpushed into the background every class handed down from the MiddleAges.

　　We see, therefore, how the modern bourgeoisie is itself the product ofa long course of development, of a series of revolutions in the modes ofproduction and of exchange.

　　Each step in the development of the bourgeoisie was accompanied bya corresponding political advance in that class. An oppressed class underthe sway of the feudal nobility, an armed and self-governing associationof medieval commune: here independent urban republic (as in Italy and Germany); there taxable "third estate" of the monarchy (as in France); af-terward, in the period of manufacturing proper, serving either the semi-feudal or the absolute monarchy as a counterpoise against the nobility,and, in fact, cornerstone of the great monarchies in general   the bour-geoisie has at last, since the establishment of Modern Industry and of theworld market, conquered for itself, in the modern representative state,exclusive political sway. The executive of the modern state is but a com-mittee for managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie.The bourgeoisie, historically, has played a most revolutionary part.

　　The bourgeoisie, wherever it has got the upper hand, has put an end toall feudal, patriarchal, idyllic relations. It has pitilessly torn asunder themotley feudal ties that bound man to his "natural superiors", and has leftno other nexus between man and man than naked self-interest, than cal-lous "cash payment". It has drowned out the most heavenly ecstasies ofreligious fervour, of chivalrous enthusiasm, of philistine sentimentalism,in the icy water of egotistical calculation. It has resolved personal worthinto exchange value, and in place of the numberless indefeasiblechartered freedoms, has set up that single, unconscionable freedom  Free Trade. In one word, for exploitation, veiled by religious and politic-al illusions, it has substituted naked, shameless, direct, brutalexploitation.

　　The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halo every occupation hithertohonored and looked up to with reverent awe. It has converted the physi-cian, the lawyer, the priest, the poet, the man of science, into its paidwage laborers.

　　The bourgeoisie has torn away from the family its sentimental veil,and has reduced the family relation into a mere money relation.

　　The bourgeoisie has disclosed how it came to pass that the brutal dis-play of vigour in the Middle Ages, which reactionaries so much admire,found its fitting complement in the most slothful indolence. It has beenthe first to show what man's activity can bring about. It has accom-plished wonders far surpassing Egyptian pyramids, Roman aqueducts,and Gothic cathedrals; it has conducted expeditions that put in the shadeall former exoduses of nations and crusades.

　　The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionizing the in-struments of production, and thereby the relations of production, andwith them the whole relations of society. Conservation of the old modesof production in unaltered form, was, on the contrary, the first conditionof existence for all earlier industrial classes. Constant revolutionizing ofproduction, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions, everlast-ing uncertainty and agitation distinguish the bourgeois epoch from allearlier ones. All fixed, fast frozen relations, with their train of ancientand venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new-formedones become antiquated before they can ossify. All that is solid melts intoair, all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face withsober senses his real condition of life and his relations with his kind.

　　The need of a constantly expanding market for its products chases thebourgeoisie over the entire surface of the globe. It must nestle every-where, settle everywhere, establish connections everywhere.

　　The bourgeoisie has, through its exploitation of the world market, giv-en a cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in everycountry. To the great chagrin of reactionaries, it has drawn from underthe feet of industry the national ground on which it stood. All old-estab-lished national industries have been destroyed or are daily being des-troyed. They are dislodged by new industries, whose introduction be-comes a life and death question for all civilized nations, by industriesthat no longer work up indigenous raw material, but raw materialdrawn from the remotest zones; industries whose products are con-sumed, not only at home, but in every quarter of the globe. In place ofthe old wants, satisfied by the production of the country, we find newwants, requiring for their satisfaction the products of distant lands andclimes. In place of the old local and national seclusion and self-suffi-ciency, we have intercourse in every direction, universal inter-depend-ence of nations. And as in material, so also in intellectual production.The intellectual creations of individual nations become common prop-erty. National one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness become more andmore impossible, and from the numerous national and local literatures,there arises a world literature.

　　The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of pro-duction, by the immensely facilitated means of communication, drawsall, even the most barbarian, nations into civilization. The cheap prices ofcommodities are the heavy artillery, with which it batters down allChinese walls, with which it forces the barbarians' intensely obstinatehatred of foreigners to capitulate. It compels all nations, on pain of ex-tinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of production; it compels them tointroduce what it calls civilization into their midst, i.e., to become bour-geois themselves. In one word, it creates a world after its own image.

　　The bourgeoisie has subjected the country to the rule of the towns. Ithas created enormous cities, has greatly increased the urban populationas compared with the rural, and has thus rescued a considerable part ofthe population from the idiocy of rural life. Just as it has made the coun-try dependent on the towns, so it has made barbarian and semi-barbari-an countries dependent on the civilized ones, nations of peasants on na-tions of bourgeois, the East on the West.

　　The bourgeoisie keeps more and more doing away with the scatteredstate of the population, of the means of production, and of property. Ithas agglomerated population, centralized the means of production, andhas concentrated property in a few hands. The necessary consequence ofthis was political centralization. Independent, or but loosely connectedprovinces, with separate interests, laws, governments, and systems oftaxation, became lumped together into one nation, with one government,one code of laws, one national class interest, one frontier, and one cus-toms tariff.

　　The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has cre-ated more massive and more colossal productive forces than have allpreceding generations together. Subjection of nature's forces to man, ma-chinery, application of chemistry to industry and agriculture, steam nav-igation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of whole continents for cul-tivation, canalization or rivers, whole populations conjured out of theground   what earlier century had even a presentiment that such pro-ductive forces slumbered in the lap of social labor?

　　We see then: the means of production and of exchange, on whosefoundation the bourgeoisie built itself up, were generated in feudal soci-ety. At a certain stage in the development of these means of productionand of exchange, the conditions under which feudal society producedand exchanged, the feudal organization of agriculture and manufactur-ing industry, in one word, the feudal relations of property became nolonger compatible with the already developed productive forces; theybecame so many fetters. They had to be burst asunder; they were burstasunder.

　　Into their place stepped free competition, accompanied by a social andpolitical constitution adapted in it, and the economic and political swayof the bourgeois class.

　　A similar movement is going on before our own eyes. Modern bour-geois society, with its relations of production, of exchange and of prop-erty, a society that has conjured up such gigantic means of productionand of exchange, is like the sorcerer who is no longer able to control thepowers of the nether world whom he has called up by his spells. Formany a decade past, the history of industry and commerce is but the his-tory of the revolt of modern productive forces against modern conditionsof production, against the property relations that are the conditions forthe existence of the bourgeois and of its rule. It is enough to mention thecommercial crises that, by their periodical return, put the existence of the

　　entire bourgeois society on its trial, each time more threateningly. Inthese crises, a great part not only of the existing products, but also of thepreviously created productive forces, are periodically destroyed. In thesecrises, there breaks out an epidemic that, in all earlier epochs, wouldhave seemed an absurdity   the epidemic of over-production. Societysuddenly finds itself put back into a state of momentary barbarism; it ap-pears as if a famine, a universal war of devastation, had cut off the sup-ply of every means of subsistence; industry and commerce seem to bedestroyed. And why? Because there is too much civilization, too muchmeans of subsistence, too much industry, too much commerce. The pro-ductive forces at the disposal of society no longer tend to further the de-velopment of the conditions of bourgeois property; on the contrary, theyhave become too powerful for these conditions, by which they arefettered, and so soon as they overcome these fetters, they bring disorderinto the whole of bourgeois society, endanger the existence of bourgeoisproperty. The conditions of bourgeois society are too narrow to comprisethe wealth created by them. And how does the bourgeoisie get overthese crises? On the one hand, by enforced destruction of a mass of pro-ductive forces; on the other, by the conquest of new markets, and by themore thorough exploitation of the old ones. That is to say, by paving theway for more extensive and more destructive crises, and by diminishingthe means whereby crises are prevented.

　　The weapons with which the bourgeoisie felled feudalism to the ground are now turned against the bourgeoisie itself.

　　But not only has the bourgeoisie forged the weapons that bring deathto itself; it has also called into existence the men who are to wield thoseweapons   the modern working class   the proletarians.

　　In proportion as the bourgeoisie, i.e., capital, is developed, in the sameproportion is the proletariat, the modern working class, developed   aclass of laborers, who live only so long as they find work, and who findwork only so long as their labor increases capital. These laborers, whomust sell themselves piecemeal, are a commodity, like every other articleof commerce, and are consequently exposed to all the vicissitudes ofcompetition, to all the fluctuations of the market.

　　Owing to the extensive use of machinery, and to the division of labor,the work of the proletarians has lost all individual character, and, con-sequently, all charm for the workman. He becomes an appendage of themachine, and it is only the most simple, most monotonous, and mosteasily acquired knack, that is required of him. Hence, the cost of

　　production of a workman is restricted, almost entirely, to the means ofsubsistence that he requires for maintenance, and for the propagation ofhis race. But the price of a commodity, and therefore also of labor, isequal to its cost of production. In proportion, therefore, as the repulsive-ness of the work increases, the wage decreases. What is more, in propor-tion as the use of machinery and division of labor increases, in the sameproportion the burden of toil also increases, whether by prolongation ofthe working hours, by the increase of the work exacted in a given time,or by increased speed of machinery, etc.

　　Modern Industry has converted the little workshop of the patriarchalmaster into the great factory of the industrial capitalist. Masses oflaborers, crowded into the factory, are organized like soldiers. Asprivates of the industrial army, they are placed under the command of aperfect hierarchy of officers and sergeants. Not only are they slaves ofthe bourgeois class, and of the bourgeois state; they are daily and hourlyenslaved by the machine, by the overlooker, and, above all, in the indi-vidual bourgeois manufacturer himself. The more openly this despotismproclaims gain to be its end and aim, the more petty, the more hatefuland the more embittering it is.

　　The less the skill and exertion of strength implied in manual labor, inother words, the more modern industry becomes developed, the more isthe labor of men superseded by that of women. Differences of age andsex have no longer any distinctive social validity for the working class.All are instruments of labor, more or less expensive to use, according totheir age and sex.

　　No sooner is the exploitation of the laborer by the manufacturer, so farat an end, that he receives his wages in cash, than he is set upon by theother portion of the bourgeoisie, the landlord, the shopkeeper, the pawn-broker, etc.

　　The lower strata of the middle class   the small tradespeople, shop-keepers, and retired tradesmen generally, the handicraftsmen and peas-ants   all these sink gradually into the proletariat, partly because theirdiminutive capital does not suffice for the scale on which Modern In-dustry is carried on, and is swamped in the competition with the largecapitalists, partly because their specialized skill is rendered worthless bynew methods of production. Thus, the proletariat is recruited from allclasses of the population.The proletariat goes through various stages of development. With itsbirth begins its struggle with the bourgeoisie. At first, the contest is

　　carried on by individual laborers, then by the work of people of a fact-ory, then by the operative of one trade, in one locality, against the indi-vidual bourgeois who directly exploits them. They direct their attacksnot against the bourgeois condition of production, but against the instru-ments of production themselves; they destroy imported wares that com-pete with their labor, they smash to pieces machinery, they set factoriesablaze, they seek to restore by force the vanished status of the workmanof the Middle Ages.

　　At this stage, the laborers still form an incoherent mass scattered overthe whole country, and broken up by their mutual competition. If any-where they unite to form more compact bodies, this is not yet the con-sequence of their own active union, but of the union of the bourgeoisie,which class, in order to attain its own political ends, is compelled to setthe whole proletariat in motion, and is moreover yet, for a time, able todo so. At this stage, therefore, the proletarians do not fight their enemies,but the enemies of their enemies, the remnants of absolute monarchy, thelandowners, the non-industrial bourgeois, the petty bourgeois. Thus, thewhole historical movement is concentrated in the hands of the bour-geoisie; every victory so obtained is a victory for the bourgeoisie.

　　But with the development of industry, the proletariat not only in-creases in number; it becomes concentrated in greater masses, itsstrength grows, and it feels that strength more. The various interests andconditions of life within the ranks of the proletariat are more and moreequalized, in proportion as machinery obliterates all distinctions of labor,and nearly everywhere reduces wages to the same low level. The grow-ing competition among the bourgeois, and the resulting commercialcrises, make the wages of the workers ever more fluctuating. The in-creasing improvement of machinery, ever more rapidly developing,makes their livelihood more and more precarious; the collisions betweenindividual workmen and individual bourgeois take more and more thecharacter of collisions between two classes. Thereupon, the workers be-gin to form combinations (trade unions) against the bourgeois; they clubtogether in order to keep up the rate of wages; they found permanent as-sociations in order to make provision beforehand for these occasional re-volts. Here and there, the contest breaks out into riots.

　　Now and then the workers are victorious, but only for a time. The realfruit of their battles lie not in the immediate result, but in the ever ex-panding union of the workers. This union is helped on by the improvedmeans of communication that are created by Modern Industry, and thatplace the workers of different localities in contact with one another. It

　　was just this contact that was needed to centralize the numerous localstruggles, all of the same character, into one national struggle betweenclasses. But every class struggle is a political struggle. And that union, toattain which the burghers of the Middle Ages, with their miserable high-ways, required centuries, the modern proletarian, thanks to railways,achieve in a few years.

　　This organization of the proletarians into a class, and, consequently,into a political party, is continually being upset again by the competitionbetween the workers themselves. But it ever rises up again, stronger,firmer, mightier. It compels legislative recognition of particular interestsof the workers, by taking advantage of the divisions among the bour-geoisie itself. Thus, the Ten-Hours Bill in England was carried.

　　Altogether, collisions between the classes of the old society further inmany ways the course of development of the proletariat. The bourgeoisiefinds itself involved in a constant battle. At first with the aristocracy;later on, with those portions of the bourgeoisie itself, whose interestshave become antagonistic to the progress of industry; at all time with thebourgeoisie of foreign countries. In all these battles, it sees itself com-pelled to appeal to the proletariat, to ask for help, and thus to drag it intothe political arena. The bourgeoisie itself, therefore, supplies the prolet-ariat with its own elements of political and general education, in otherwords, it furnishes the proletariat with weapons for fighting thebourgeoisie.

　　Further, as we have already seen, entire sections of the ruling class are,by the advance of industry, precipitated into the proletariat, or are atleast threatened in their conditions of existence. These also supply theproletariat with fresh elements of enlightenment and progress.

　　Finally, in times when the class struggle nears the decisive hour, theprogress of dissolution going on within the ruling class, in fact withinthe whole range of old society, assumes such a violent, glaring character,that a small section of the ruling class cuts itself adrift, and joins the re-volutionary class, the class that holds the future in its hands. Just as,therefore, at an earlier period, a section of the nobility went over to thebourgeoisie, so now a portion of the bourgeoisie goes over to the prolet-ariat, and in particular, a portion of the bourgeois ideologists, who haveraised themselves to the level of comprehending theoretically the histor-ical movement as a whole.Of all the classes that stand face to face with the bourgeoisie today, theproletariat alone is a genuinely revolutionary class. The other classes

　　decay and finally disappear in the face of Modern Industry; the proletari-at is its special and essential product.

　　The lower middle class, the small manufacturer, the shopkeeper, theartisan, the peasant, all these fight against the bourgeoisie, to save fromextinction their existence as fractions of the middle class. They are there-fore not revolutionary, but conservative. Nay, more, they are reactionary,for they try to roll back the wheel of history. If, by chance, they are re-volutionary, they are only so in view of their impending transfer into theproletariat; they thus defend not their present, but their future interests;they desert their own standpoint to place themselves at that of theproletariat.

　　The "dangerous class", the social scum, that passively rotting massthrown off by the lowest layers of the old society, may, here and there,be swept into the movement by a proletarian revolution; its conditions oflife, however, prepare it far more for the part of a bribed tool of reaction-ary intrigue.

　　In the condition of the proletariat, those of old society at large arealready virtually swamped. The proletarian is without property; his rela-tion to his wife and children has no longer anything in common with thebourgeois family relations; modern industry labor, modern subjection tocapital, the same in England as in France, in America as in Germany, hasstripped him of every trace of national character. Law, morality, religion,are to him so many bourgeois prejudices, behind which lurk in ambushjust as many bourgeois interests.

　　All the preceding classes that got the upper hand sought to fortifytheir already acquired status by subjecting society at large to their condi-tions of appropriation. The proletarians cannot become masters of theproductive forces of society, except by abolishing their own previousmode of appropriation, and thereby also every other previous mode ofappropriation. They have nothing of their own to secure and to fortify;their mission is to destroy all previous securities for, and insurances of,individual property.

　　All previous historical movements were movements of minorities, orin the interest of minorities. The proletarian movement is the self-con-scious, independent movement of the immense majority, in the interestof the immense majority. The proletariat, the lowest stratum of ourpresent society, cannot stir, cannot raise itself up, without the whole su-per incumbent strata of official society being sprung into the air.

　　Though not in substance, yet in form, the struggle of the proletariatwith the bourgeoisie is at first a national struggle. The proletariat of eachcountry must, of course, first of all settle matters with its ownbourgeoisie.

　　In depicting the most general phases of the development of the prolet-ariat, we traced the more or less veiled civil war, raging within existingsociety, up to the point where that war breaks out into open revolution,and where the violent overthrow of the bourgeoisie lays the foundationfor the sway of the proletariat.

　　Hitherto, every form of society has been based, as we have alreadyseen, on the antagonism of oppressing and oppressed classes. But in or-der to oppress a class, certain conditions must be assured to it underwhich it can, at least, continue its slavish existence. The serf, in the peri-od of serfdom, raised himself to membership in the commune, just as thepetty bourgeois, under the yoke of the feudal absolutism, managed todevelop into a bourgeois. The modern laborer, on the contrary, instead ofrising with the process of industry, sinks deeper and deeper below theconditions of existence of his own class. He becomes a pauper, and pau-perism develops more rapidly than population and wealth. And here itbecomes evident that the bourgeoisie is unfit any longer to be the rulingclass in society, and to impose its conditions of existence upon society asan overriding law. It is unfit to rule because it is incompetent to assurean existence to its slave within his slavery, because it cannot help lettinghim sink into such a state, that it has to feed him, instead of being fed byhim. Society can no longer live under this bourgeoisie, in other words, itsexistence is no longer compatible with society.

　　The essential conditions for the existence and for the sway of the bour-geois class is the formation and augmentation of capital; the conditionfor capital is wage labor. Wage labor rests exclusively on competitionbetween the laborers. The advance of industry, whose involuntary pro-moter is the bourgeoisie, replaces the isolation of the laborers, due tocompetition, by the revolutionary combination, due to association. Thedevelopment of Modern Industry, therefore, cuts from under its feet thevery foundation on which the bourgeoisie produces and appropriatesproducts. What the bourgeoisie therefore produces, above all, are its owngrave-diggers. Its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equallyinevitable.

　　Chapter 2

　　Proletarians and Communists

　　In what relation do the Communists stand to the proletarians as awhole? The Communists do not form a separate party opposed to theother working-class parties.

　　They have no interests separate and apart from those of the proletariatas a whole.They do not set up any sectarian principles of their own, by which toshape and mold the proletarian movement.

　　The Communists are distinguished from the other working-classparties by this only:

　　In the national struggles of the proletarians of the different countries,they point out and bring to the front the common interests of the entireproletariat, independently of all nationality. In the various stages of de-velopment which the struggle of the working class against the bour-geoisie has to pass through, they always and everywhere represent theinterests of the movement as a whole.

　　The Communists, therefore, are on the one hand practically, the mostadvanced and resolute section of the working-class parties of everycountry, that section which pushes forward all others; on the other hand,theoretically, they have over the great mass of the proletariat the advant-age of clearly understanding the lines of march, the conditions, and theultimate general results of the proletarian movement.

　　The immediate aim of the Communists is the same as that of all otherproletarian parties: Formation of the proletariat into a class, overthrow ofthe bourgeois supremacy, conquest of political power by the proletariat.

　　The theoretical conclusions of the Communists are in no way based onideas or principles that have been invented, or discovered, by this or thatwould-be universal reformer.

　　They merely express, in general terms, actual relations springing froman existing class struggle, from a historical movement going on underour very eyes. The abolition of existing property relations is not at all adistinctive feature of communism.

　　All property relations in the past have continually been subject to his-torical change consequent upon the change in historical conditions.

　　The French Revolution, for example, abolished feudal property in fa-vor of bourgeois property.

　　The distinguishing feature of communism is not the abolition of prop-erty generally, but the abolition of bourgeois property. But modern bour-geois private property is the final and most complete expression of thesystem of producing and appropriating products that is based on classantagonisms, on the exploitation of the many by the few.

　　In this sense, the theory of the Communists may be summed up in thesingle sentence: Abolition of private property.

　　We Communists have been reproached with the desire of abolishingthe right of personally acquiring property as the fruit of a man's ownlabor, which property is alleged to be the groundwork of all personalfreedom, activity and independence.

　　Hard-won, self-acquired, self-earned property! Do you mean the prop-erty of petty artisan and of the small peasant, a form of property thatpreceded the bourgeois form? There is no need to abolish that; the devel-opment of industry has to a great extent already destroyed it, and is stilldestroying it daily.

　　Or do you mean the modern bourgeois private property?

　　But does wage labor create any property for the laborer? Not a bit. Itcreates capital, i.e., that kind of property which exploits wage labor, andwhich cannot increase except upon conditions of begetting a new supplyof wage labor for fresh exploitation. Property, in its present form, isbased on the antagonism of capital and wage labor. Let us examine bothsides of this antagonism.

　　To be a capitalist, is to have not only a purely personal, but a socialstatus in production. Capital is a collective product, and only by theunited action of many members, nay, in the last resort, only by theunited action of all members of society, can it be set in motion.

　　Capital is therefore not only personal; it is a social power.

　　When, therefore, capital is converted into common property, into theproperty of all members of society, personal property is not thereby

　　transformed into social property. It is only the social character of theproperty that is changed. It loses its class character.

　　Let us now take wage labor.

　　The average price of wage labor is the minimum wage, i.e., thatquantum of the means of subsistence which is absolutely requisite tokeep the laborer in bare existence as a laborer. What, therefore, the wagelaborer appropriates by means of his labor merely suffices to prolongand reproduce a bare existence. We by no means intend to abolish thispersonal appropriation of the products of labor, an appropriation that ismade for the maintenance and reproduction of human life, and thatleaves no surplus wherewith to command the labor of others. All that wewant to do away with is the miserable character of this appropriation,under which the laborer lives merely to increase capital, and is allowedto live only in so far as the interest of the ruling class requires it.

　　In bourgeois society, living labor is but a means to increase accumu-lated labor. In communist society, accumulated labor is but a means towiden, to enrich, to promote the existence of the laborer.

　　In bourgeois society, therefore, the past dominates the present; in com-munist society, the present dominates the past. In bourgeois society, cap-ital is independent and has individuality, while the living person is de-pendent and has no individuality.

　　And the abolition of this state of things is called by the bourgeois, ab-olition of individuality and freedom! And rightly so. The abolition ofbourgeois individuality, bourgeois independence, and bourgeois free-dom is undoubtedly aimed at.

　　By freedom is meant, under the present bourgeois conditions of pro-duction, free trade, free selling and buying.

　　But if selling and buying disappears, free selling and buying disap-pears also. This talk about free selling and buying, and all the other"brave words" of our bourgeois about freedom in general, have a mean-ing, if any, only in contrast with restricted selling and buying, with thefettered traders of the Middle Ages, but have no meaning when opposedto the communist abolition of buying and selling, or the bourgeois condi-tions of production, and of the bourgeoisie itself.

　　You are horrified at our intending to do away with private property.But in your existing society, private property is already done away withfor nine-tenths of the population; its existence for the few is solely due toits non-existence in the hands of those nine-tenths. You reproach us,

　　therefore, with intending to do away with a form of property, the neces-sary condition for whose existence is the non-existence of any propertyfor the immense majority of society.

　　In one word, you reproach us with intending to do away with yourproperty. Precisely so; that is just what we intend.

　　From the moment when labor can no longer be converted into capital,money, or rent, into a social power capable of being monopolized, i.e.,from the moment when individual property can no longer be trans-formed into bourgeois property, into capital, from that moment, you say,individuality vanishes.

　　You must, therefore, confess that by "individual" you mean no otherperson than the bourgeois, than the middle-class owner of property. Thisperson must, indeed, be swept out of the way, and made impossible.

　　Communism deprives no man of the power to appropriate theproducts of society; all that it does is to deprive him of the power to sub-jugate the labor of others by means of such appropriations.

　　It has been objected that upon the abolition of private property, allwork will cease, and universal laziness will overtake us.

　　According to this, bourgeois society ought long ago to have gone tothe dogs through sheer idleness; for those who acquire anything, do notwork. The whole of this objection is but another expression of the tauto-logy: There can no longer be any wage labor when there is no longer anycapital.

　　All objections urged against the communistic mode of producing andappropriating material products, have, in the same way, been urgedagainst the communistic mode of producing and appropriating intellec-tual products. Just as to the bourgeois, the disappearance of class prop-erty is the disappearance of production itself, so the disappearance ofclass culture is to him identical with the disappearance of all culture.

　　That culture, the loss of which he laments, is, for the enormous major-ity, a mere training to act as a machine.

　　But don't wrangle with us so long as you apply, to our intended aboli-tion of bourgeois property, the standard of your bourgeois notions offreedom, culture, law, etc. Your very ideas are but the outgrowth of theconditions of your bourgeois production and bourgeois property, just asyour jurisprudence is but the will of your class made into a law for all, awill whose essential character and direction are determined by the eco-nomical conditions of existence of your class.

　　The selfish misconception that induces you to transform into eternallaws of nature and of reason the social forms stringing from your presentmode of production and form of property   historical relations that riseand disappear in the progress of production   this misconception youshare with every ruling class that has preceded you. What you seeclearly in the case of ancient property, what you admit in the case offeudal property, you are of course forbidden to admit in the case of yourown bourgeois form of property.

　　Abolition of the family! Even the most radical flare up at this infamousproposal of the Communists.

　　On what foundation is the present family, the bourgeois family,based? On capital, on private gain. In its completely developed form, thisfamily exists only among the bourgeoisie. But this state of things finds itscomplement in the practical absence of the family among proletarians,and in public prostitution.

　　The bourgeois family will vanish as a matter of course when its com-plement vanishes, and both will vanish with the vanishing of capital.

　　Do you charge us with wanting to stop the exploitation of children bytheir parents? To this crime we plead guilty.

　　But, you say, we destroy the most hallowed of relations, when we re-place home education by social.

　　And your education! Is not that also social, and determined by the so-cial conditions under which you educate, by the intervention direct or in-direct, of society, by means of schools, etc.? The Communists have notintended the intervention of society in education; they do but seek to al-ter the character of that intervention, and to rescue education from theinfluence of the ruling class.

　　The bourgeois claptrap about the family and education, about the hal-lowed correlation of parents and child, becomes all the more disgusting,the more, by the action of Modern Industry, all the family ties among theproletarians are torn asunder, and their children transformed into simplearticles of commerce and instruments of labor.

　　But you Communists would introduce community of women, screamsthe bourgeoisie in chorus.

　　The bourgeois sees his wife a mere instrument of production. He hearsthat the instruments of production are to be exploited in common, and,naturally, can come to no other conclusion that the lot of being commonto all will likewise fall to the women.

　　He has not even a suspicion that the real point aimed at is to do awaywith the status of women as mere instruments of production.

　　For the rest, nothing is more ridiculous than the virtuous indignationof our bourgeois at the community of women which, they pretend, is tobe openly and officially established by the Communists. The Commun-ists have no need to introduce free love; it has existed almost from timeimmemorial.

　　Our bourgeois, not content with having wives and daughters of theirproletarians at their disposal, not to speak of common prostitutes, takethe greatest pleasure in seducing each other's wives.

　　Bourgeois marriage is, in reality, a system of wives in common andthus, at the most, what the Communists might possibly be reproachedwith is that they desire to introduce, in substitution for a hypocriticallyconcealed, an openly legalized system of free love. For the rest, it is self-evident that the abolition of the present system of production must bringwith it the abolition of free love springing from that system, i.e., of pros-titution both public and private.

　　The Communists are further reproached with desiring to abolish coun-tries and nationality.

　　The working men have no country. We cannot take from them whatthey have not got. Since the proletariat must first of all acquire politicalsupremacy, must rise to be the leading class of the nation, must consti-tute itself the nation, it is, so far, itself national, though not in the bour-geois sense of the word.

　　National differences and antagonism between peoples are daily moreand more vanishing, owing to the development of the bourgeoisie, tofreedom of commerce, to the world market, to uniformity in the mode ofproduction and in the conditions of life corresponding thereto.

　　The supremacy of the proletariat will cause them to vanish still faster.United action of the leading civilized countries at least is one of the firstconditions for the emancipation of the proletariat.

　　In proportion as the exploitation of one individual by another will alsobe put an end to, the exploitation of one nation by another will also beput an end to. In proportion as the antagonism between classes withinthe nation vanishes, the hostility of one nation to another will come to anend.

　　The charges against communism made from a religious, a philosophic-al and, generally, from an ideological standpoint, are not deserving ofserious examination.

　　Does it require deep intuition to comprehend that man's ideas, views,and conception, in one word, man's consciousness, changes with everychange in the conditions of his material existence, in his social relationsand in his social life?

　　What else does the history of ideas prove, than that intellectual pro-duction changes its character in proportion as material production ischanged? The ruling ideas of each age have ever been the ideas of its rul-ing class.

　　When people speak of the ideas that revolutionize society, they do butexpress that fact that within the old society the elements of a new onehave been created, and that the dissolution of the old ideas keeps evenpace with the dissolution of the old conditions of existence.

　　When the ancient world was in its last throes, the ancient religionswere overcome by Christianity. When Christian ideas succumbed in theeighteenth century to rationalist ideas, feudal society fought its deathbattle with the then revolutionary bourgeoisie. The ideas of religiousliberty and freedom of conscience merely gave expression to the sway offree competition within the domain of knowledge.

　　"Undoubtedly," it will be said, "religious, moral, philosophical, andjuridicial ideas have been modified in the course of historical develop-ment. But religion, morality, philosophy, political science, and law, con-stantly survived this change."

　　"There are, besides, eternal truths, such as Freedom, Justice, etc., thatare common to all states of society. But communism abolishes eternaltruths, it abolishes all religion, and all morality, instead of constitutingthem on a new basis; it therefore acts in contradiction to all past historic-al experience."

　　What does this accusation reduce itself to? The history of all past soci-ety has consisted in the development of class antagonisms, antagonismsthat assumed different forms at different epochs.

　　But whatever form they may have taken, one fact is common to allpast ages, viz., the exploitation of one part of society by the other. Nowonder, then, that the social consciousness of past ages, despite all themultiplicity and variety it displays, moves within certain common forms,

　　or general ideas, which cannot completely vanish except with the totaldisappearance of class antagonisms.

　　The communist revolution is the most radical rupture with traditionalrelations; no wonder that its development involved the most radical rup-ture with traditional ideas.

　　But let us have done with the bourgeois objections to communism.

　　We have seen above that the first step in the revolution by the workingclass is to raise the proletariat to the position of ruling class to win thebattle of democracy.

　　The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, by degree, allcapital from the bourgeoisie, to centralize all instruments of productionin the hands of the state, i.e., of the proletariat organized as the rulingclass; and to increase the total productive forces as rapidly as possible.

　　Of course, in the beginning, this cannot be effected except by means ofdespotic inroads on the rights of property, and on the conditions of bour-geois production; by means of measures, therefore, which appear eco-nomically insufficient and untenable, but which, in the course of themovement, outstrip themselves, necessitate further inroads upon the oldsocial order, and are unavoidable as a means of entirely revolutionizingthe mode of production.

　　These measures will, of course, be different in different countries.

　　Nevertheless, in most advanced countries, the following will be prettygenerally applicable.

　　Abolition of property in land and application of all rents of land to pub-lic purposes. A heavy progressive or graduated income tax. Abolition ofall rights of inheritance. Confiscation of the property of all emigrants andrebels. Centralization of credit in the banks of the state, by means of a na-tional bank with state capital and an exclusive monopoly. Centralizationof the means of communication and transport in the hands of the state.Extension of factories and instruments of production owned by the state;the bringing into cultivation of waste lands, and the improvement of thesoil generally in accordance with a common plan. Equal obligation of allto work. Establishment of industrial armies, especially for agriculture.Combination of agriculture with manufacturing industries; gradual abol-ition of all the distinction between town and country by a more equabledistribution of the populace over the country. 10. Free education for allchildren in public schools. Abolition of children's factory labor in itspresent form. Combination of education with industrial production, etc.

　　When, in the course of development, class distinctions have disap-peared, and all production has been concentrated in the hands of a vastassociation of the whole nation, the public power will lose its politicalcharacter. Political power, properly so called, is merely the organizedpower of one class for oppressing another. If the proletariat during itscontest with the bourgeoisie is compelled, by the force of circumstances,to organize itself as a class; if, by means of a revolution, it makes itselfthe ruling class, and, as such, sweeps away by force the old conditions ofproduction, then it will, along with these conditions, have swept awaythe conditions for the existence of class antagonisms and of classes gen-erally, and will thereby have abolished its own supremacy as a class.

　　In place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes and class antag-onisms, we shall have an association in which the free development ofeach is the condition for the free development of all.

　　Chapter 3

　　Socialist and Communist Literature

　　1. Reactionary Socialism

　　Feudal Socialism

　　Owing to their historical position, it became the vocation of the aristo-cracies of France and England to write pamphlets against modern bour-geois society. In the French Revolution of July 1830, and in the Englishreform agitation, these aristocracies again succumbed to the hateful up-start. Thenceforth, a serious political struggle was altogether out of thequestion. A literary battle alone remained possible. But even in the do-main of literature, the old cries of the restoration period had becomeimpossible.

　　In order to arouse sympathy, the aristocracy was obliged to lose sight,apparently, of its own interests, and to formulate its indictment againstthe bourgeoisie in the interest of the exploited working class alone. Thus,the aristocracy took their revenge by singing lampoons on their newmasters and whispering in his ears sinister prophesies of comingcatastrophe.

　　In this way arose feudal socialism: half lamentation, half lampoon; halfan echo of the past, half menace of the future; at times, by its bitter, wittyand incisive criticism, striking the bourgeoisie to the very heart's core,but always ludicrous in its effect, through total incapacity to compre-hend the march of modern history.

　　The aristocracy, in order to rally the people to them, waved theproletarian alms-bag in front for a banner. But the people, so often as itjoined them, saw on their hindquarters the old feudal coats of arms, anddeserted with loud and irreverent laughter.

　　One section of the French Legitimists and "Young England" exhibitedthis spectacle.

　　In pointing out that their mode of exploitation was different to that ofthe bourgeoisie, the feudalists forget that they exploited under circum-stances and conditions that were quite different and that are now anti-quated. In showing that, under their rule, the modern proletariat neverexisted, they forget that the modern bourgeoisie is the necessary off-spring of their own form of society.

　　For the rest, so little do they conceal the reactionary character of theircriticism that their chief accusation against the bourgeois amounts tothis: that under the bourgeois regime a class is being developed which isdestined to cut up, root and branch, the old order of society.

　　What they upbraid the bourgeoisie with is not so much that it creates aproletariat as that it creates a revolutionary proletariat.

　　In political practice, therefore, they join in all corrective measuresagainst the working class; and in ordinary life, despite their high-falutinphrases, they stoop to pick up the golden apples dropped from the treeof industry, and to barter truth, love, and honour, for traffic in wool,beetroot-sugar, and potato spirits.

　　As the parson has ever gone hand in hand with the landlord, so hasclerical socialism with feudal socialism.

　　Nothing is easier than to give Christian asceticism a socialist tinge. Hasnot Christianity declaimed against private property, against marriage,against the state? Has it not preached in the place of these, charity andpoverty, celibacy and mortification of the flesh, monastic life and MotherChurch? Christian socialism is but the holy water with which the priestconsecrates the heart-burnings of the aristocrat.

　　Petty-Bourgeois Socialism

　　The feudal aristocracy was not the only class that was ruined by thebourgeoisie, not the only class whose conditions of existence pined andperished in the atmosphere of modern bourgeois society. The medievalburgesses and the small peasant proprietors were the precursors of themodern bourgeoisie. In those countries which are but little developed,industrially and commercially, these two classes still vegetate side byside with the rising bourgeoisie.

　　In countries where modern civilization has become fully developed, anew class of petty bourgeois has been formed, fluctuating between pro-letariat and bourgeoisie, and ever renewing itself a supplementary part

　　of bourgeois society. The individual members of this class, however, asbeing constantly hurled down into the proletariat by the action of com-petition, and, as Modern Industry develops, they even see the momentapproaching when they will completely disappear as an independentsection of modern society, to be replaced in manufactures, agricultureand commerce, by overlookers, bailiffs and shopmen.

　　In countries like France, where the peasants constitute far more thanhalf of the population, it was natural that writers who sided with theproletariat against the bourgeoisie should use, in their criticism of thebourgeois r辿gime, the standard of the peasant and petty bourgeois, andfrom the standpoint of these intermediate classes, should take up thecudgels for the working class. Thus arose petty-bourgeois socialism. Sis-mondi was the head of this school, not only in France but also inEngland.

　　This school of socialism dissected with great acuteness the contradic-tions in the conditions of modern production. It laid bare the hypocriticalapologies of economists. It proved, incontrovertibly, the disastrous ef-fects of machinery and division of labor; the concentration of capital andland in a few hands; overproduction and crises; it pointed out the inevit-able ruin of the petty bourgeois and peasant, the misery of the proletari-at, the anarchy in production, the crying inequalities in the distributionof wealth, the industrial war of extermination between nations, the dis-solution of old moral bonds, of the old family relations, of the oldnationalities.

　　In it positive aims, however, this form of socialism aspires either torestoring the old means of production and of exchange, and with themthe old property relations, and the old society, or to cramping the mod-ern means of production and of exchange within the framework of theold property relations that have been, and were bound to be, explodedby those means. In either case, it is both reactionary and Utopian.

　　Its last words are: corporate guilds for manufacture; patriarchal rela-tions in agriculture.

　　Ultimately, when stubborn historical facts had dispersed all intoxicat-ing effects of self-deception, this form of socialism ended in a miserablehangover.

　　German or "True" Socialism

　　The socialist and communist literature of France, a literature that ori-ginated under the pressure of a bourgeoisie in power, and that was theexpressions of the struggle against this power, was introduced into Ger-many at a time when the bourgeoisie in that country had just begun itscontest with feudal absolutism.

　　German philosophers, would-be philosophers, and beaux esprits (menof letters), eagerly seized on this literature, only forgetting that whenthese writings immigrated from France into Germany, French social con-ditions had not immigrated along with them. In contact with German so-cial conditions, this French literature lost all its immediate practical signi-ficance and assumed a purely literary aspect. Thus, to the German philo-sophers of the eighteenth century, the demands of the first French Re-volution were nothing more than the demands of "Practical Reason" ingeneral, and the utterance of the will of the revolutionary French bour-geoisie signified, in their eyes, the laws of pure will, of will as it wasbound to be, of true human will generally.

　　The work of the German literati consisted solely in bringing the newFrench ideas into harmony with their ancient philosophical conscience,or rather, in annexing the French ideas without deserting their ownphilosophic point of view.

　　This annexation took place in the same way in which a foreign lan-guage is appropriated, namely, by translation.

　　It is well known how the monks wrote silly lives of Catholic saintsover the manuscripts on which the classical works of ancient heathen-dom had been written. The German literati reversed this process withthe profane French literature. They wrote their philosophical nonsensebeneath the French original. For instance, beneath the French criticism ofthe economic functions of money, they wrote "alienation of humanity",and beneath the French criticism of the bourgeois state they wrote"dethronement of the category of the general", and so forth.

　　The introduction of these philosophical phrases at the back of theFrench historical criticisms, they dubbed "Philosophy of Action", "TrueSocialism", "German Science of Socialism", "Philosophical Foundation ofSocialism", and so on.

　　The French socialist and communist literature was thus completelyemasculated. And, since it ceased, in the hands of the German, to expressthe struggle of one class with the other, he felt conscious of having over-come "French one-sidedness" and of representing, not true requirements,but the requirements of truth; not the interests of the proletariat, but the

　　interests of human nature, of man in general, who belongs to no class,has no reality, who exists only in the misty realm of philosophicalfantasy.

　　This German socialism, which took its schoolboy task so seriously andsolemnly, and extolled its poor stock-in-trade in such a mountebankfashion, meanwhile gradually lost its pedantic innocence.

　　The fight of the Germans, and especially of the Prussian bourgeoisie,against feudal aristocracy and absolute monarchy, in other words, theliberal movement, became more earnest.

　　By this, the long-wished for opportunity was offered to "True" Social-ism of confronting the political movement with the socialistic demands,of hurling the traditional anathemas against liberalism, against repres-entative government, against bourgeois competition, bourgeois freedomof the press, bourgeois legislation, bourgeois liberty and equality, and ofpreaching to the masses that they had nothing to gain, and everything tolose, by this bourgeois movement. German socialism forgot, in the nickof time, that the French criticism, whose silly echo it was, presupposedthe existence of modern bourgeois society, with its corresponding eco-nomic conditions of existence, and the political constitution adaptedthereto, the very things those attainment was the object of the pendingstruggle in Germany.

　　To the absolute governments, with their following of parsons, profess-ors, country squires, and officials, it served as a welcome scarecrowagainst the threatening bourgeoisie.

　　It was a sweet finish, after the bitter pills of flogging and bullets, withwhich these same governments, just at that time, dosed the Germanworking-class risings.

　　While this "True" Socialism thus served the government as a weaponfor fighting the German bourgeoisie, it, at the same time, directly repres-ented a reactionary interest, the interest of German philistines. In Ger-many, the petty-bourgeois class, a relic of the sixteenth century, andsince then constantly cropping up again under the various forms, is thereal social basis of the existing state of things.

　　To preserve this class is to preserve the existing state of things in Ger-many. The industrial and political supremacy of the bourgeoisiethreatens it with certain destruction   on the one hand, from the concen-tration of capital; on the other, from the rise of a revolutionary proletari-at. "True" Socialism appeared to kill these two birds with one stone. Itspread like an epidemic.

　　The robe of speculative cobwebs, embroidered with flowers of rhetor-ic, steeped in the dew of sickly sentiment, this transcendental robe inwhich the German Socialists wrapped their sorry "eternal truths", all skinand bone, served to wonderfully increase the sale of their goods amongstsuch a public. And on its part German socialism recognized, more andmore, its own calling as the bombastic representative of the petty-bour-geois philistine.

　　It proclaimed the German nation to be the model nation, and the Ger-man petty philistine to be the typical man. To every villainous meannessof this model man, it gave a hidden, higher, socialistic interpretation, theexact contrary of its real character. It went to the extreme length of dir-ectly opposing the "brutally destructive" tendency of communism, and ofproclaiming its supreme and impartial contempt of all class struggles.With very few exceptions, all the so-called socialist and communist pub-lications that now (1847) circulate in Germany belong to the domain ofthis foul and enervating literature.

　　2. Conservative or Bourgeois Socialism

　　A part of the bourgeoisie is desirous of redressing social grievances in or-der to secure the continued existence of bourgeois society.

　　To this section belong economists, philanthropists, humanitarians, im-provers of the condition of the working class, organizers of charity,members of societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals, temper-ance fanatics, hole-and-corner reformers of every imaginable kind. Thisform of socialism has, moreover, been worked out into completesystems.

　　We may cite Proudhon's Philosophy of Poverty as an example of thisform.

　　The socialistic bourgeois want all the advantages of modern social con-ditions without the struggles and dangers necessarily resulting there-from. They desire the existing state of society, minus its revolutionaryand disintegrating elements. They wish for a bourgeoisie without a pro-letariat. The bourgeoisie naturally conceives the world in which it is su-preme to be the best; and bourgeois socialism develops this comfortableconception into various more or less complete systems. In requiring theproletariat to carry out such a system, and thereby to march straight-away into the social New Jerusalem, it but requires in reality that theproletariat should remain within the bounds of existing society, butshould cast away all its hateful ideas concerning the bourgeoisie.

　　A second, and more practical, but less systematic, form of this social-ism sought to depreciate every revolutionary movement in the eyes ofthe working class by showing that no mere political reform, but only achange in the material conditions of existence, in economical relations,could be of any advantage to them. By changes in the material conditionsof existence, this form of socialism, however, by no means understandsabolition of the bourgeois relations of production, an abolition that canbe affected only by a revolution, but administrative reforms, based onthe continued existence of these relations; reforms, therefore, that in norespect affect the relations between capital and labor, but, at the best,lessen the cost, and simplify the administrative work of bourgeoisgovernment.

　　Bourgeois socialism attains adequate expression when, and onlywhen, it becomes a mere figure of speech.

　　Free trade: for the benefit of the working class. Protective duties: forthe benefit of the working class. Prison reform: for the benefit of the

　　working class. This is the last word and the only seriously meant word ofbourgeois socialism.

　　It is summed up in the phrase: the bourgeois is a bourgeois   for thebenefit of the working class.

　　3. Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism

　　We do not here refer to that literature which, in every great modern re-volution, has always given voice to the demands of the proletariat, suchas the writings of Babeuf and others.

　　The first direct attempts of the proletariat to attain its own ends, madein times of universal excitement, when feudal society was being over-thrown, necessarily failed, owing to the then undeveloped state of theproletariat, as well as to the absence of the economic conditions for itsemancipation, conditions that had yet to be produced, and could be pro-duced by the impending bourgeois epoch alone. The revolutionary liter-ature that accompanied these first movements of the proletariat had ne-cessarily a reactionary character. It inculcated universal asceticism andsocial levelling in its crudest form.

　　The socialist and communist systems, properly so called, those ofSaint-Simon, Fourier, Owen, and others, spring into existence in the earlyundeveloped period, described above, of the struggle between proletari-at and bourgeoisie (see Section 1. Bourgeois and Proletarians).

　　The founders of these systems see, indeed, the class antagonisms, aswell as the action of the decomposing elements in the prevailing form ofsociety. But the proletariat, as yet in its infancy, offers to them the spec-tacle of a class without any historical initiative or any independent polit-ical movement.

　　Since the development of class antagonism keeps even pace with thedevelopment of industry, the economic situation, as they find it, does notas yet offer to them the material conditions for the emancipation of theproletariat. They therefore search after a new social science, after new so-cial laws, that are to create these conditions.

　　Historical action is to yield to their personal inventive action; historic-ally created conditions of emancipation to fantastic ones; and the gradu-al, spontaneous class organization of the proletariat to an organization ofsociety especially contrived by these inventors. Future history resolves it-self, in their eyes, into the propaganda and the practical carrying out oftheir social plans.

　　In the formation of their plans, they are conscious of caring chiefly forthe interests of the working class, as being the most suffering class. Onlyfrom the point of view of being the most suffering class does the prolet-ariat exist for them.

　　The undeveloped state of the class struggle, as well as their own sur-roundings, causes Socialists of this kind to consider themselves far su-perior to all class antagonisms. They want to improve the condition ofevery member of society, even that of the most favored. Hence, they ha-bitually appeal to society at large, without the distinction of class; nay,by preference, to the ruling class. For how can people when once theyunderstand their system, fail to see in it the best possible plan of the bestpossible state of society?

　　Hence, they reject all political, and especially all revolutionary action;they wish to attain their ends by peaceful means, necessarily doomed tofailure, and by the force of example, to pave the way for the new socialgospel.

　　Such fantastic pictures of future society, painted at a time when theproletariat is still in a very undeveloped state and has but a fantastic con-ception of its own position, correspond with the first instinctive yearn-ings of that class for a general reconstruction of society.

　　But these socialist and communist publications contain also a criticalelement. They attack every principle of existing society. Hence, they arefull of the most valuable materials for the enlightenment of the workingclass. The practical measures proposed in them   such as the abolitionof the distinction between town and country, of the family, of the carry-ing on of industries for the account of private individuals, and of thewage system, the proclamation of social harmony, the conversion of thefunction of the state into a more superintendence of production   allthese proposals point solely to the disappearance of class antagonismswhich were, at that time, only just cropping up, and which, in these pub-lications, are recognized in their earliest indistinct and undefined formsonly. These proposals, therefore, are of a purely utopian character.

　　The significance of critical-utopian socialism and communism bears aninverse relation to historical development. In proportion as the modernclass struggle develops and takes definite shape, this fantastic standingapart from the contest, these fantastic attacks on it, lose all practical valueand all theoretical justifications. Therefore, although the originators ofthese systems were, in many respects, revolutionary, their disciples have,in every case, formed mere reactionary sects. They hold fast by the ori-ginal views of their masters, in opposition to the progressive historicaldevelopment of the proletariat. They, therefore, endeavour, and that con-sistently, to deaden the class struggle and to reconcile the class antagon-isms. They still dream of experimental realization of their social utopias,

　　of founding isolated phalansteres, of establishing "Home Colonies", orsetting up a "Little Icaria"   pocket editions of the New Jerusalem  and to realise all these castles in the air, they are compelled to appeal tothe feelings and purses of the bourgeois. By degrees, they sink into thecategory of the reactionary conservative socialists depicted above, differ-ing from these only by more systematic pedantry, and by their fanaticaland superstitious belief in the miraculous effects of their social science.

　　They, therefore, violently oppose all political action on the part of theworking class; such action, according to them, can only result from blindunbelief in the new gospel.

　　The Owenites in England, and the Fourierists in France, respectively,oppose the Chartists and the R辿formistes.

　　Chapter 4

　　Position of the Communists in Relation to the VariousExisting Opposition Parties

　　Section II has made clear the relations of the Communists to the existingworking-class parties, such as the Chartists in England and the AgrarianReformers in America.

　　The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims, forthe enforcement of the momentary interests of the working class; but inthe movement of the present, they also represent and take care of the fu-ture of that movement. In France, the Communists ally with the SocialDemocrats against the conservative and radical bourgeoisie, reserving,however, the right to take up a critical position in regard to phases andillusions traditionally handed down from the great Revolution.

　　In Switzerland, they support the Radicals, without losing sight of thefact that this party consists of antagonistic elements, partly of DemocraticSocialists, in the French sense, partly of radical bourgeois.

　　In Poland, they support the party that insists on an agrarian revolutionas the prime condition for national emancipation, that party which fo-mented the insurrection of Krakow in 1846.

　　In Germany, they fight with the bourgeoisie whenever it acts in a re-volutionary way, against the absolute monarchy, the feudal squirearchy,and the petty-bourgeoisie.

　　But they never cease, for a single instant, to instill into the workingclass the clearest possible recognition of the hostile antagonism betweenbourgeoisie and proletariat, in order that the German workers maystraightway use, as so many weapons against the bourgeoisie, the socialand political conditions that the bourgeoisie must necessarily introducealong with its supremacy, and in order that, after the fall of the reaction-ary classes in Germany, the fight against the bourgeoisie itself may im-mediately begin.

　　The Communists turn their attention chiefly to Germany, because thatcountry is on the eve of a bourgeois revolution that is bound to be car-ried out under more advanced conditions of European civilization andwith a much more developed proletariat than that of England was in theseventeenth, and France in the eighteenth century, and because the bour-geois revolution in Germany will be but the prelude to an immediatelyfollowing proletarian revolution.

　　In short, the Communists everywhere support every revolutionarymovement against the existing social and political order of things.

　　In all these movements, they bring to the front, as the leading questionin each, the property question, no matter what its degree of developmentat the time.

　　Finally, they labor everywhere for the union and agreement of thedemocratic parties of all countries.The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openlydeclare that their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow ofall existing social conditions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a commun-ist revolution. The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains.They have a world to win.

　　WORKERS OF ALL COUNTRIES, UNITE!

　　Chapter 5

　　Appendix A: Prefaces to various Language Editions

　　1. 1872 German Edition

　　The Communist League, an international association of workers, whichcould of course be only a secret one, under conditions obtaining at thetime, commissioned us, the undersigned, at the Congress held in Londonin November 1847, to write for publication a detailed theoretical andpractical programme for the Party. Such was the origin of the followingManifesto, the manuscript of which travelled to London to be printed afew weeks before the February Revolution. First published in German, ithas been republished in that language in at least twelve different edi-tions in Germany, England, and America. It was published in English forthe first time in 1850 in the Red Republican, London, translated by MissHelen Macfarlane, and in 1871 in at least three different translations inAmerica. The french version first appeared in Paris shortly before theJune insurrection of 1848, and recently in Le Socialiste of New York. Anew translation is in the course of preparation. A Polish version ap-peared in London shortly after it was first published in Germany. A Rus-sian translation was published in Geneva in the 'sixties. Into Danish, too,it was translated shortly after its appearance.

　　However much that state of things may have altered during the lasttwenty-five years, the general principles laid down in the Manifesto are,on the whole, as correct today as ever. Here and there, some detail mightbe improved. The practical application of the principles will depend, asthe Manifesto itself states, everywhere and at all times, on the historicalconditions for the time being existing, and, for that reason, no specialstress is laid on the revolutionary measures proposed at the end of Sec-tion II. That passage would, in many respects, be very differentlyworded today. In view of the gigantic strides of Modern Industry since1848, and of the accompanying improved and extended organization ofthe working class, in view of the practical experience gained, first in the

　　February Revolution, and then, still more, in the Paris Commune, wherethe proletariat for the first time held political power for two wholemonths, this programme has in some details been antiquated. One thingespecially was proved by the Commune, viz., that "the working classcannot simply lay hold of ready-made state machinery, and wield it forits own purposes." (See The Civil War in France: Address of the GeneralCouncil of the International Working Men's Assocation, 1871, where thispoint is further developed.) Further, it is self-evident that the criticism ofsocialist literature is deficient in relation to the present time, because itcomes down only to 1847; also that the remarks on the relation of theCommunists to the various opposition parties (Section IV), although, inprinciple still correct, yet in practice are antiquated, because the politicalsituation has been entirely changed, and the progress of history hasswept from off the earth the greater portion of the political parties thereenumerated.But then, the Manifesto has become a historical document which wehave no longer any right to alter. A subsequent edition may perhaps ap-pear with an introduction bridging the gap from 1847 to the present day;but this reprint was too unexpected to leave us time for that.

　　Karl Marx & Fredrick Engels

　　London, June 24, 1872

　　2. 1882 Russian Edition

　　The first Russian edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party, trans-lated by Bakunin, was published early in the 'sixties by the printing of-fice of the Kolokol. Then the West could see in it (the Russian edition ofthe Manifesto) only a literary curiosity. Such a view would be impossibletoday.

　　What a limited field the proletarian movement occupied at that time(December 1847) is most clearly shown by the last section: the position ofthe Communists in relation to the various opposition parties in variouscountries. Precisely Russia and the United States are missing here. It wasthe time when Russia constituted the last great reserve of all Europeanreaction, when the United States absorbed the surplus proletarian forcesof Europe through immigration. Both countries provided Europe withraw materials and were at the same time markets for the sale of its indus-trial products. Both were, therefore, in one way of another, pillars of theexisting European system.

　　How very different today. Precisely European immigration fittedNorth American for a gigantic agricultural production, whose competi-tion is shaking the very foundations of European landed property  large and small. At the same time, it enabled the United States to exploitits tremendous industrial resources with an energy and on a scale thatmust shortly break the industrial monopoly of Western Europe, and es-pecially of England, existing up to now. Both circumstances react in a re-volutionary manner upon America itself. Step by step, the small andmiddle land ownership of the farmers, the basis of the whole politicalconstitution, is succumbing to the competition of giant farms; at the sametime, a mass industrial proletariat and a fabulous concentration of capitalfunds are developing for the first time in the industrial regions.

　　And now Russia! During the Revolution of 1848-9, not only theEuropean princes, but the European bourgeois as well, found their onlysalvation from the proletariat just beginning to awaken in Russian inter-vention. The Tsar was proclaimed the chief of European reaction. Today,he is a prisoner of war of the revolution in Gatchina, and Russia formsthe vanguard of revolutionary action in Europe.

　　The Communist Manifesto had, as its object, the proclamation of theinevitable impending dissolution of modern bourgeois property. But inRussia we find, face-to-face with the rapidly flowering capitalist swindleand bourgeois property, just beginning to develop, more than half the

　　land owned in common by the peasants. Now the question is: can theRussian obshchina, though greatly undermined, yet a form of primevalcommon ownership of land, pass directly to the higher form of Com-munist common ownership? Or, on the contrary, must it first passthrough the same process of dissolution such as constitutes the historicalevolution of the West?

　　The only answer to that possible today is this: If the Russian Revolu-tion becomes the signal for a proletarian revolution in the West, so thatboth complement each other, the present Russian common ownership ofland may serve as the starting point for a communist development.

　　Karl Marx & Fredrick Engels

　　London, January 21, 1882

　　3. 1883 German Edition

　　The preface to the present edition I must, alas, sign alone. Marx, the manto whom the whole working class class of Europe and America owesmore than to any one else   rests at Highgate Cemetary and over hisgrave the first grass is already growing. Since his death [March 13, 1883],there can be even less thought of revising or supplementing the Mani-festo. But I consider it all the more necessary again to state the followingexpressly:

　　The basic thought running through the Manifesto   that economicproduction, and the structure of society of every historical epoch neces-sarily arising therefrom, constitute the foundation for the political andintellectual history of that epoch; that consequently (ever since the dis-solution of the primaeval communal ownership of land) all history hasbeen a history of class struggles, of struggles between exploited and ex-ploiting, between dominated and dominating classes at various stages ofsocial evolution; that this struggle, however, has now reached a stagewhere the exploited and oppressed class (the proletariat) can no longeremancipate itself from the class which exploits and oppresses it (thebourgeoisie), without at the same time forever freeing the whole of soci-ety from exploitation, oppression, class struggles   this basic thoughtbelongs soley and exclusively to Marx.

　　I have already stated this many times; but precisely now is it necessarythat it also stand in front of the Manifesto itself.

　　Fredrick Engels

　　London, June 28, 1883

　　4. 1888 English Edition

　　The Manifesto was published as the platform of the Communist League,a working men's association, first exclusively German, later on interna-tional, and under the political conditions of the Continent before 1848,unavoidably a secret society. At a Congress of the League, held inNovember 1847, Marx and Engels were commissioned to prepare a com-plete theoretical and practical party programme. Drawn up in German,in January 1848, the manuscript was sent to the printer in London a fewweeks before the French Revolution of February 24. A French translationwas brought out in Paris shortly before the insurrection of June 1848. Thefirst English translation, by Miss Helen Macfarlane, appeared in GeorgeJulian Harney's Red Republican, London, 1850. A Danish and a Polishedition had also been published.

　　The defeat of the Parisian insurrection of June 1848   the first greatbattle between proletariat and bourgeoisie   drove again into the back-ground, for a time, the social and political aspirations of the Europeanworking class. Thenceforth, the struggle for supremacy was, again, as ithad been before the Revolution of February, solely between different sec-tions of the propertied class; the working class was reduced to a fight forpolitical elbow-room, and to the position of extreme wing of the middle-class Radicals. Wherever independent proletarian movements continuedto show signs of life, they were ruthlessly hunted down. Thus the Prussi-an police hunted out the Central Board of the Communist League, thenlocated in Cologne. The members were arrested and, after eighteenmonths' imprisonment, they were tried in October 1852. This celebrated"Cologne Communist Trial" lasted from October 4 till November 12; sev-en of the prisoners were sentenced to terms of imprisonment in a fort-ress, varying from three to six years. Immediately after the sentence, theLeague was formlly dissolved by the remaining members. As to theManifesto, it seemed henceforth doomed to oblivion.

　　When the European workers had recovered sufficient strength for an-other attack on the ruling classes, the International Working Men's Asso-ciation sprang up. But this association, formed with the express aim ofwelding into one body the whole militant proletariat of Europe andAmerica, could not at once proclaim the principles laid down in theManifesto. The International was bound to have a programme broadenough to be acceptable to the English trade unions, to the followers ofProudhon in France, Belgium, Italy, and Spain, and to the Lassalleans inGermany.

　　Marx, who drew up this programme to the satisfaction of all parties,entirely trusted to the intellectual development of the working class,which was sure to result from combined action and mutual discussion.The very events and vicissitudes in the struggle against capital, the de-feats even more than the victories, could not help bringing home tomen's minds the insufficiency of their various favorite nostrums, andpreparing the way for a more complete insight into the true conditionsfor working-class emancipation. And Marx was right. The International,on its breaking in 1874, left the workers quite different men from what itfound them in 1864. Proudhonism in France, Lassalleanism in Germany,were dying out, and even the conservative English trade unions, thoughmost of them had long since severed their connection with the Interna-tional, were gradually advancing towards that point at which, last yearat Swansea, their president could say in their name: "Continental social-ism has lost its terror for us." In fact, the principles of the Manifesto hadmade considerable headway among the working men of all countries.

　　The Manifesto itself came thus to the front again. Since 1850, the Ger-man text had been reprinted several times in Switzerland, England, andAmerica. In 1872, it was translated into English in New York, where thetranslation was published in Woorhull and Claflin's Weekly. From thisEnglish version, a French one was made in Le Socialiste of New York.Since then, at least two more English translations, more or less mutilated,have been brought out in America, and one of them has been reprintedin England. The first Russian translation, made by Bakunin, was pub-lished at Herzen's Kolokol office in Geneva, about 1863; a second one, bythe heroic Vera Zasulich, also in Geneva, in 1882. A new Danish editionis to be found in Socialdemokratisk Bibliothek, Copenhagen, 1885; afresh French translation in Le Socialiste, Paris, 1886. From this latter, aSpanish version was prepared and published in Madrid, 1886. The Ger-man reprints are not to be counted; there have been twelve altogether atthe least. An Armenian translation, which was to be published in Con-stantinople some months ago, did not see the light, I am told, because thepublisher was afraid of bringing out a book with the name of Marx on it,while the translator declined to call it his own production. Of furthertranslations into other languages I have heard but had not seen. Thus thehistory of the Manifesto reflects the history of the modern working-classmovement; at present, it is doubtless the most wide spread, the most in-ternational production of all socialist literature, the common platform ac-knowledged by millions of working men from Siberia to California.

　　Yet, when it was written, we could not have called it a socialist mani-festo. By Socialists, in 1847, were understood, on the one hand the adher-ents of the various Utopian systems: Owenites in England, Fourierists inFrance, both of them already reduced to the position of mere sects, andgradually dying out; on the other hand, the most multifarious socialquacks who, by all manner of tinkering, professed to redress, withoutany danger to capital and profit, all sorts of social grievances, in bothcases men outside the working-class movement, and looking rather tothe "educated" classes for support. Whatever portion of the workingclass had become convinced of the insufficiency of mere political revolu-tions, and had proclaimed the necessity of total social change, called it-self Communist. It was a crude, rough-hewn, purely instinctive sort ofcommunism; still, it touched the cardinal point and was powerfulenough amongst the working class to produce the Utopian communismof Cabet in France, and of Weitling in Germany. Thus, in 1847, socialismwas a middle-class movement, communism a working-class movement.Socialism was, on the Continent at least, "respectable"; communism wasthe very opposite. And as our notion, from the very beginning, was that"the emancipation of the workers must be the act of the working class it-self," there could be no doubt as to which of the two names we musttake. Moreover, we have, ever since, been far from repudiating it.

　　The Manifesto being our joint production, I consider myself bound tostate that the fundamental proposition which forms the nucleus belongsto Marx. That proposition is: That in every historical epoch, the prevail-ing mode of economic production and exchange, and the social organiza-tion necessarily following from it, form the basis upon which it is builtup, and from that which alone can be explained the political and intellec-tual history of that epoch; that consequently the whole history of man-kind (since the dissolution of primitive tribal society, holding land incommon ownership) has been a history of class struggles, contestsbetween exploiting and exploited, ruling and oppressed classes; That thehistory of these class struggles forms a series of evolutions in which,nowadays, a stage has been reached where the exploited and oppressedclass   the proletariat   cannot attain its emancipation from the swayof the exploiting and ruling class   the bourgeoisie   without, at thesame time, and once and for all, emancipating society at large from allexploitation, oppression, class distinction, and class struggles.

　　This proposition, which, in my opinion, is destined to do for historywhat Darwin's theory has done for biology, we both of us, had beengradually approaching for some years before 1845. How far I had

　　independently progressed towards it is best shown by my Conditions ofthe Working Class in England. But when I again met Marx at Brussels, inspring 1845, he had it already worked out and put it before me in termsalmost as clear as those in which I have stated it here.

　　From our joint preface to the German edition of 1872, I quote thefollowing:

　　"However much that state of things may have altered during the lasttwenty-five years, the general principles laid down in the Manifesto are,on the whole, as correct today as ever. Here and there, some detail mightbe improved. The practical application of the principles will depend, asthe Manifesto itself states, everywhere and at all times, on the historicalconditions for the time being existing, and, for that reason, no specialstress is laid on the revolutionary measures proposed at the end of Sec-tion II. That passage would, in many respects, be very differentlyworded today. In view of the gigantic strides of Modern Industry since1848, and of the accompanying improved and extended organization ofthe working class, in view of the practical experience gained, first in theFebruary Revolution, and then, still more, in the Paris Commune, wherethe proletariat for the first time held political power for two wholemonths, this programme has in some details been antiquated. One thingespecially was proved by the Commune, viz., that "the working classcannot simply lay hold of ready-made state machinery, and wield it forits own purposes." (See The Civil War in France: Address of the GeneralCouncil of the International Working Men's Assocation 1871, where thispoint is further developed.) Further, it is self-evident that the criticism ofsocialist literature is deficient in relation to the present time, because itcomes down only to 1847; also that the remarks on the relation of theCommunists to the various opposition parties (Section IV), although, inprinciple still correct, yet in practice are antiquated, because the politicalsituation has been entirely changed, and the progress of history hasswept from off the Earth the greater portion of the political parties thereenumerated.

　　"But then, the Manifesto has become a historical document which wehave no longer any right to alter."

　　The present translation is by Mr Samuel Moore, the translator of thegreater portion of Marx's Capital. We have revised it in common, and Ihave added a few notes explanatory of historical allusions.Fredrick Engels

　　London, January 30, 1888

　　5. 1890 German Edition

　　Since the 1883 German edition preface was written, a new German edi-tion of the Manifesto has again become necessary, and much has alsohappened to the Manifesto which should be recorded here.

　　A second Russian translation  by Vera Zasulich  appeared inGeneva in 1882; the preface to that edition was written by Marx and my-self. Unfortunately, the original German manuscript has gone astray; Imust therefore retranslate from the Russian which will in no way im-prove the text. It reads:

　　[ Reprint of the 1882 Russian Edition ]

　　At about the same date, a new Polish version appeared in Geneva:Manifest Kommunistyczny.

　　Furthermore, a new Danish translation has appeared in the Socialde-mokratisk Bibliothek, Copenhagen, 1885. Unfortunately, it is not quitecomplete; certain essential passages, which seem to have presented diffi-culties to the translator, have been omitted, and, in addition, there aresigns of carelessness here and there, which are all the more unpleasantlyconspicuous since the translation indicates that had the translator taken alittle more pains, he would have done an excellent piece of work.

　　A new French version appeared in 1886, in Le Socialiste of Paris; it isthe best published to date.

　　From this latter, a Spanish version was published the same year in ElSocialista of Madrid, and then reissued in pamphlet form: Manifesto delPartido Comunista por Carlos Marx y F. Engels, Madrid, Administracionde El Socialista, Hernan Cortes.

　　As a matter of curiosity, I may mention that in 1887 the manuscript ofan Armenian translation was offered to a publisher in Constantinople.But the good man did not have the courage to publish something bearingthe name of Marx and suggested that the translator set down his ownname as author, which the latter however declined.

　　After one, and then another, of the more or less inaccurate Americantranslations had been repeatedly reprinted in England, an authentic ver-sion at last appeared in 1888. This was my friend Samuel Moore, and wewent through it together once more before it went to press. It is entitled:Manifesto of the Communist Party, by Karl Marx and Frederick Engels.Authorized English translation, edited and annotated by Frederick

　　Engels, 1888, London, William Reeves, 185 Fleet Street, E.C. I have addedsome of the notes of that edition to the present one.

　　The Manifesto has had a history of its own. Greeted with enthusiasm,at the time of its appearance, by the not at all numerous vanguard of sci-entific socialism (as is proved by the translations mentioned in the firstplace), it was soon forced into the background by the reaction that beganwith the defeat of the Paris workers in June 1848, and was finally excom-municated "by law" in the conviction of the Cologne Communists inNovember 1852. With the disappearance from the public scene of theworkers' movement that had begun with the February Revolution, theManifesto too passed into the background.

　　When the European workers had again gathered sufficient strength fora new onslaught upon the power of the ruling classes, the InternationalWorking Men's Association came into being. Its aim was to weld togeth-er into one huge army the whole militant working class of Europe andAmerica. Therefore it could not set out from the principles laid down inthe Manifesto. It was bound to have a programme which would not shutthe door on the English trade unions, the French, Belgian, Italian, andSpanish Proudhonists, and the German Lassalleans. This programme the considerations underlying the Statutes of the International   wasdrawn up by Marx with a master hand acknowledged even by the Bak-unin and the anarchists. For the ultimate final triumph of the ideas setforth in the Manifesto, Marx relied solely upon the intellectual develop-ment of the working class, as it necessarily has to ensue from united ac-tion and discussion. The events and vicissitudes in the struggle againstcapital, the defeats even more than the successes, could not but demon-strate to the fighters the inadequacy of their former universal panaceas,and make their minds more receptive to a thorough understanding ofthe true conditions for working-class emancipation. And Marx was right.The working class of 1874, at the dissolution of the International, was al-together different from that of 1864, at its foundation. Proudhonism inthe Latin countries, and the specific Lassalleanism in Germany, were dy-ing out; and even the ten arch-conservative English trade unions weregradually approaching the point where, in 1887, the chairman of theirSwansea Congress could say in their name: "Continental socialism haslost its terror for us." Yet by 1887 continental socialism was almost ex-clusively the theory heralded in the Manifesto. Thus, to a certain extent,the history of the Manifesto reflects the history of the modern working-class movement since 1848. At present, it is doubtless the most widelycirculated, the most international product of all socialist literature, the

　　common programme of many millions of workers of all countries from Siberia to California.

　　Nevertheless, when it appeared, we could not have called it a socialistmanifesto. In 1847, two kinds of people were considered socialists. Onthe one hand were the adherents of the various utopian systems, notablythe Owenites in England and the Fourierists in France, both of whom, atthat date, had already dwindled to mere sects gradually dying out. Onthe other, the manifold types of social quacks who wanted to eliminatesocial abuses through their various universal panaceas and all kinds ofpatch-work, without hurting capital and profit in the least. In both cases,people who stood outside the labor movement and who looked for sup-port rather to the "educated" classes. The section of the working class,however, which demanded a radical reconstruction of society, convincedthat mere political revolutions were not enough, then called itself Com-munist. It was still a rough-hewn, only instinctive and frequently some-what crude communism. Yet, it was powerful enough to bring into beingtwo systems of utopian communism   in France, the "Icarian" commun-ists of Cabet, and in Germany that of Weitling. Socialism in 1847 signi-fied a bourgeois movement, communism a working-class movement. So-cialism was, on the Continent at least, quite respectable, whereas com-munism was the very opposite. And since we were very decidely of theopinion as early as then that "the emancipation of the workers must bethe task of the working class itself," we could have no hesitation as towhich of the two names we should choose. Nor has it ever occured to usto repudiate it.

　　"Working men of all countries, unite!" But few voices responded whenwe proclaimed these words to the world 42 years ago, on the eve of thefirst Paris Revolution in which the proletariat came out with the de-mands of its own. On September 28, 1864, however, the proletarians ofmost of the Western European countries joined hands in the Internation-al Working Men's Association of glorious memory. True, the Internation-al itself lived only nine years. But that the eternal union of the proletari-ans of all countries created by it is still alive and lives stronger than ever,there is no better witness than this day. Because today, as I write theselines, the European and American proletariat is reviewing its fightingforces, mobilized for the first time, mobilized as one army, under oneflag, for one immediate aim: the standard eight-hour working day to beestablished by legal enactment, as proclaimed by the Geneva Congress ofthe International in 1866, and again by the Paris Workers' Congress of1889. And today's spectacle will open the eyes of the capitalists and

　　landlords of all countries to the fact that today the proletarians of allcountries are united indeed.

　　If only Marx were still by my side to see this with his own eyes!

　　Fredrick Engels

　　London, May 1, 1890

　　6. 1892 Polish Edition

　　The fact that a new Polish edition of the Communist Manifesto has be-come necessary gives rise to various thoughts.

　　First of all, it is noteworthy that of late the Manifesto has become anindex, as it were, of the development of large-scale industry on theEuropean continent. In proportion as large-scale industry expands in agiven country, the demand grows among the workers of that country forenlightenment regarding their position as the working class in relation tothe possessing classes, the socialist movement spreads among them andthe demand for the Manifesto increases. Thus, not only the state of the la-bour movement but also the degree of development of large-scale in-dustry can be measured with fair accuracy in every country by the num-ber of copies of the Manifesto circulated in the language of that country.

　　Accordingly, the new Polish edition indicates a decided progress ofPolish industry. And there can be no doubt whatever that this progresssince the previous edition published ten years ago has actually takenplace. Russian Poland, Congress Poland, has become the big industrialregion of the Russian Empire. Whereas Russian large-scale industry isscattered sporadically   a part round the Gulf of Finland, another in thecenter (Moscow and Vladimir), a third along the coasts of the Black andAzov seas, and still others elsewhere   Polish industry has been packedinto a relatively small area and enjoys both the advantages and disad-vantages arising from such concentration. The competing Russian manu-facturers acknowledged the advantages when they demanded protectivetariffs against Poland, in spit of their ardent desire to transform the Polesinto Russians. The disadvantages   for the Polish manufacturers and theRussian government   are manifest in the rapid spread of socialist ideasamong the Polish workers and in the growing demand for the Manifesto.

　　But the rapid development of Polish industry, outstripping that ofRussia, is in its turn a new proof of the inexhaustible vitality of the Polishpeople and a new guarantee of its impending national restoration. Andthe restoration of an independent and strong Poland is a matter whichconcerns not only the Poles but all of us. A sincere international collabor-ation of the European nations is possible only if each of these nations isfully autonomous in its own house. The Revolution of 1848, which underthe banner of the proletariat, after all, merely let the proletarian fightersdo the work of the bourgeoisie, also secured the independence of Italy,Germany and Hungary through its testamentary executors, Louis Bona-parte and Bismarck; but Poland, which since 1792 had done more for the

　　Revolution than all these three together, was left to its own resourceswhen it succumbed in 1863 to a tenfold greater Russian force. The nobil-ity could neither maintain nor regain Polish independence; today, to thebourgeoisie, this independence is, to say the last, immaterial. Neverthe-less, it is a necessity for the harmonious collaboration of the Europeannations. It can be gained only by the young Polish proletariat, and in itshands it is secure. For the workers of all the rest of Europe need the inde-pendence of Poland just as much as the Polish workers themselves.

　　Fredrick Engels

　　London, February 10, 1892

　　7. 1893 Italian Edition

　　Publication of the Manifesto of the Communist Party coincided, one maysay, with March 18, 1848, the day of the revolution in Milan and Berlin,which were armed uprisings of the two nations situated in the center, theone, of the continent of Europe, the other, of the Mediterranean; two na-tions until then enfeebled by division and internal strife, and thus fallenunder foreign domination. While Italy was subject to the Emperor ofAustria, Germany underwent the yoke, not less effective though more in-direct, of the Tsar of all the Russias. The consequences of March 18, 1848,freed both Italy and Germany from this disgrace; if from 1848 to 1871these two great nations were reconstituted and somehow again put ontheir own, it was as Karl Marx used to say, because the men who sup-pressed the Revolution of 1848 were, nevertheless, its testamentary ex-ecutors in spite of themselves.

　　Everywhere that revolution was the work of the working class; it wasthe latter that built the barricades and paid with its lifeblood. Only theParis workers, in overthrowing the government, had the very definite in-tention of overthrowing the bourgeois regime. But conscious thoughthey were of the fatal antagonism existing between their own class andthe bourgeoisie, still, neither the economic progress of the country northe intellectual development of the mass of French workers had as yetreached the stage which would have made a social reconstruction pos-sible. In the final analysis, therefore, the fruits of the revolution werereaped by the capitalist class. In the other countries, in Italy, in Germany,in Austria, the workers, from the very outset, did nothing but raise thebourgeoisie to power. But in any country the rule of the bourgeoisie isimpossible without national independence Therefore, the Revolution of1848 had to bring in its train the unity and autonomy of the nations thathad lacked them up to then: Italy, Germany, Hungary. Poland will fol-low in turn.

　　Thus, if the Revolution of 1848 was not a socialist revolution, it pavedthe way, prepared the ground for the latter. Through the impetus givento large-scaled industry in all countries, the bourgeois regime during thelast forty-five years has everywhere created a numerous, concentratedand powerful proletariat. It has thus raised, to use the language of theManifesto, its own grave-diggers. Without restoring autonomy and unityto each nation, it will be impossible to achieve the international union ofthe proletariat, or the peaceful and intelligent co-operation of these na-tions toward common aims. Just imagine joint international action by the

　　Italian, Hungarian, German, Polish and Russian workers under the polit-ical conditions preceding 1848!

　　The battles fought in 1848 were thus not fought in vain. Nor have theforty-five years separating us from that revolutionary epoch passed to nopurpose. The fruits are ripening, and all I wish is that the publication ofthis Italian translation may augur as well for the victory of the Italianproletariat as the publication of the original did for the internationalrevolution.

　　The Manifesto does full justice to the revolutionary part played bycapitalism in the past. The first capitalist nation was Italy. The close ofthe feudal Middle Ages, and the opening of the modern capitalist era aremarked by a colossal figured: an Italian, Dante, both the last poet of theMiddle Ages and the first poet of modern times. Today, as in 1300, a newhistorical era is approaching. Will Italy give us the new Dante, who willmark the hour of birth of this new, proletarian era?

　　Fredrick Engels

　　London, February 1, 1893

　　Chapter 6

　　Appendix B: Definitions

　　1. Burgeoisie

　　By bourgeoisie is meant the class of modern capitalists, owners of themeans of social production and employers of wage labor. By proletariat,the class of modern wage laborers who, having no means of productionof their own, are reduced to selling their labor power in order to live.[Engels, 1888 English edition]

　　That is, all written history. In 1847, the pre-history of society, the socialorganization existing previous to recorded history, all but unknown.Since then, August von Haxthausen (1792-1866) discovered commonownership of land in Russia, Georg Ludwig von Maurer proved it to bethe social foundation from which all Teutonic races started in history,and, by and by, village communities were found to be, or to have been,the primitive form of society everywhere from India to Ireland. The in-ner organization of this primitive communistic society was laid bare, inits typical form, by Lewis Henry Morgan's (1818-1861) crowning discov-ery of the true nature of the gens and its relation to the tribe. With thedissolution of the primeval communities, society begins to be differenti-ated into separate and finally antagonistic classes. I have attempted to re-trace this dissolution in Der Ursprung der Familie, des Privateigenthu-mus und des Staats, second edition, Stuttgart, 1886. [Engels, 1888 EnglishEdition]

　　2. Guild-master

　　Guild-master, that is, a full member of a guild, a master within, not ahead of a guild. [Engels, 1888 English Edition]

　　This was the name given their urban communities by the townsmen ofItaly and France, after they had purchased or conquered their initialrights of self-government from their feudal lords. [Engels, 1890 Germanedition]

　　3. Commune

　　"Commune" was the name taken in France by the nascent towns even be-fore they had conquered from their feudal lords and masters local self-government and political rights as the "Third Estate". Generally speak-ing, for the economical development of the bourgeoisie, England is heretaken as the typical country, for its political development, France.[Engels, 1888 English Edition]

　　Not the English Restoration (1660-1689), but the French Restoration(1814-1830). [Engels, 1888 German edition]

　　This applies chiefly to Germany, where the landed aristocracy andsquirearchy have large portions of their estates cultivated for their ownaccount by stewards, and are, moreover, extensive beetroot-sugar manu-facturers and distillers of potato spirits. The wealthier british aristocracyare, as yet, rather above that; but they, too, know how to make up for de-clining rents by lending their names to floaters or more or less shadyjoint-stock companies. [Engels, 1888 German edition]

　　The revolutionary storm of 1848 swept away this whole shabby tend-ency and cured its protagonists of the desire to dabble in socialism. Thechief representative and classical type of this tendency is Mr Karl Gruen.[Engels, 1888 German edition]

　　Phalansteres were Socialist colonies on the plan of Charles Fourier;Icaria was the name given by Cabet to his Utopia and, later on, to hisAmerican Communist colony. [Engels, 1888 English Edition]

　　4. Home Colonies

　　"Home Colonies" were what Owen called his Communist model societ-ies. Phalansteres was the anem of the public palaces planned by Fourier.Icaria was the name given to the Utopian land of fancy, whose Commun-ist instituions Cabet portrayed. [Engels, 1890 German Edition]

　　The party then represented in Parliament by Ledru-Rollin, in literatureby Louis Blanc, in the daily press by the Reforme. The name of Social-Democracy signifies, with these its inventors, a section of the Democraticor Republican Party more or less tinged with socialism. [Engels, EnglishEdition 1888]

　　"This proposition", I wrote in the preface to the English translation,"which, in my opinion, is destined to do for history what Darwin's the-ory has done for biology, we both of us, had been gradually approachingfor some years before 1845. How far I had independently progressed to-wards it is best shown by my Conditions of the Working Class in Eng-land. But when I again met Marx at Brussels, in spring 1845, he had italready worked out and put it before me in terms almost as clear as thosein which I have stated it here."]

　　Lassalle personally, to us, always acknowledged himself to be a dis-ciple of Marx, and, as such, stood on the ground of the Manifesto. But inhis first public agitation, 1862-1864, he did not go beyond demanding co-operative workshops supported by state credit.